---
title: "Sipri / Freedom House data viz from 2013"
tag:
 - SIPRI
 - dc-js
 - Freedom House
 - data visualisation
categories:
 - data viz
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
---
In 2013 I made a [dc-js](http://dc-js.github.io/dc.js/) visualisation combining data from [SIPRI](https://www.sipri.org/) and [Freedom House](https://freedomhouse.org). 

Here is the original post:
<!--more-->

  
<iframe src="legacy-dataviz/index.html" onload="this.before((this.contentDocument.body||this.contentDocument).children[0]);this.remove()"></iframe>
  


2013
## Visualising the ethics of arms exports

Arms exports make a lot of money for a small number of countries. Shipments of arms are subject to certain legal requirements, but often the morality of arms exports comes under scrutiny, especially when such trades are of major geo-political importance.

As an exercise in working with dc.js, a charting library based on d3.js and crossfilter, I have put together a [data visualisation dashboard](http://textplusdata.se/dataviz-arms-transfers-and-political-freedom/?lang=en) which combines data on the volume of arms transfers from the [Stockholm International Peace Research Institute](https://www.sipri.org/research/armament-and-disarmament/arms-transfers-and-military-spending/international-arms-transfers) (Sipri) with ratings of country-level political freedom and civil liberties from [Freedom House](https://freedomhouse.org/report-types/freedom-world).

Data is for the top 25 arms exporters (smaller exporters grouped as "other exporters") between 1972 and 2012 and the Freedom House ratings of the countries they exported to - "Free", "Partly Free" or "Not Free".

**NOTE: This data mashup has not been reviewed there may be errors! Use this data at your own risk!**

It might come as no surprise to see in the stacked bar chart that Norway and Sweden are the exporters with the greatest proportion of transfers to "free" states. However, the volume of their exports is relatively small compared to, for example, the USA. France appears to have a significantly greater proportion of its exports going to "non free" countries compared to its Western counterparts.

### Freedom House

[Freedom House's methodology](https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world-2013/methodology) involves rating countries for their political rights and civil liberties on a scale of 1-7:

> Each country is assigned a numerical rating from 1 to 7 for both political rights and civil liberties, with 1 representing the most free and 7 the least free. The ratings are determined by the total number of points (up to 100) each country receives on 10 political rights questions and 15 civil liberties questions; countries receive 0 to 4 points on each question, with 0 representing the smallest degree and 4 the greatest degree of freedom. The average of the political rights and civil liberties ratings, known as the freedom rating, determines the overall status:  Free (1.0 to 2.5), Partly Free (3.0 to 5.0), or Not Free (5.5 to 7.0). Freedom House also assigns upward or downward trend arrows to countries which saw general positive or negative trends during the year that were not significant enough to result in a ratings change.

Freedom House claims that it "does not maintain a culture-bound view of freedom" and eliminates a Western cultural bias in its analysis by using the universal Declaration of Human Rights as a starting point for comparison. It also points out that:

> The survey does not rate governments or government performance per se, but rather the real-world rights and freedoms enjoyed by individuals. Freedoms can be affected by state actions as well as by nonstate actors, including insurgents and other armed groups.

A problem with Freedom House's data is that it covers uneven periods and the methodology was changed in terms of ratings.

### Sipri

Sipri uses its own method for measuring the volume (rather than the sale price) of arms transfers - TIV.

> Trend Indicator Value (TIV) data provide an indication of the volume of arms transferred. Information can be provided on the total TIV of a country, rebel group, or international organization's arms imports or exports, broken down by supplier, recipient or type of weapon system.

Sipri also has its ~~own data visualisation tool~~ (*note 2019 - this is no longer available but it is posisble to export* [raw data on arms transfers](https://www.sipri.org/databases/armstransfers)).

### Data reliability

A significant problem with bringing the data sets together was the fact that neither Sipri (~~though this has been resolved in the new portal~~ *edit 2019*) nor Freedom House use standard country codes to identify countries, instead they use their own country names.

Consequently, this is an area where there is the potential for some errors as the data has not been examined by a second pair of eyes.

Another problem is the way Freedom House has recorded its yearly assessments - they are not always based on, err, years, and 1983/4 gets pretty messy. I have just assumed that the corresponding actual year is the Freedom House report with the most months in that year and have assumed that 1983's figures are 1984.

Sipri also records arms transfers to non-state actors. I have pretty much excluded these figures, mostly because initially it was intended to have a world map as part of the visualisation (but this became too complicated with changing borders over time. It would be great to find a definitive historical map that could somehow show overlapped shapes...). This may mean that the figures will not exactly match those on the Sipri data portal.

